backlog.md, before:


done:
- switch between keyboard layouts DONE
- highlight active keyboard layout DONE
- implement ANSI layout  DONE
- remove duplicated code between Ansi and Harmonic DONE
- add narrow/wide option for ANSI
    - add second layout config DONE
    - refactor app to hold layout options closer to Keyboard layout component (maybe container components LayoutArea and MappingArea?)
    - mapping list, learning effort, colors 
- implement Ortho split layout; simply stagger bottom row to get thumb keys.
- list key mappings
- switch between mappings
- show mapping information: sourceUrl and diff to Qwerty
- calculated bigram effort
- change all the legends to display (weighted) counts (or percentage of strokes) in the colored boxes
  and show the scores as part of the legend text. (As is already done with the Learning Diff...).
- single key frequency viz
- angle viz
- URL #fragments for state parameters: layoutType, split, HarmonicType, vizType, ...
- add Unicode mappings for bottom row modifiers, so that FlexMappings can change them. Minimum affected keys are AltGr and what's to the right of it.
- add "FlexMapping.comparisonBase" so that Qwertz and Colemak can be chosen by layouts based on those.
- inner index column should not count as bigram conflict, because of nice alt-fingering.
- highlight all mappings that have the best typing scores among all layouts with the same learning effort or less
  (This is the same as the layouts with the lowest learning effort given their typing scores.)
    + One highlight color for layouts with thumb letter and another color for ones without.
    + Candidates are: Flip/Twist, Quipper, Colemak and Cozy Keyboard, Thumby Quipper, Thumby Colemak.
    + Yes, three of each seems like a good offering.
      We could add Qwerty with just the Thumb-E, but I think it's not a worthy choice except as a temporary experience.


bugs fixed:
 - Learnability Score for Wide ANSI in Mapping List is changing when I select different mappings =:-[]
 - Frequency for Thumby bigrams should be counted, even if there is no wide layout.
- validate mapping/layout/options combination from URL data, so that the app doesn't crash
- handle Harmonic variants without a matching mapping:
  + when switching to the Harmonic layout with an unsupported mapping already set
  + when switching the Harmonic variant


missing core features:
- Outside of the app: make a graph of the "efficiency frontier" with those six layouts and Qwerty — once for single and once for bigram scores. 
  (Maybe add the minimum SFB layout from Oxley each with and without thumb letter use as the right fence post for the diagram.)

- add some more explanations, especially for:
  + the "wide" mappings
  + Harmonic and Ortho general texts (maybe (i) icon in layout bar). But still repeat that text under the H and O variants.

- check consistency of all mappings:
   + variants for different layouts should be consistent (only have differences clearly attributed to the layout)
   + maybe check if some full-mappings can be omitted, because thumb30 and 3×10 do the job well enough?
   + related thumby variants should be consistent (only have the intended differences)
     * especially Thumby-KU

bugs:
- the comparisonBase mapping needs to have definitions on all layouts, thus at least a mapping30.
   Add that for qwertz and maybe add a full mapping for the ortho board to make the comparison more meaningful.
- on Thumby / Cozy Keyboard English variant, the apostrophe is counted as "changed on same finger" on the ortho layout, 
  but not on ANSI wide, although it's on the same position.
  It should not be counted as changed on either, because the change is due to the wide layout, not the letter mapping.
- fix altFinger configuration for Harmonic variants AND show it in finger viz
- HIGH_PRIO show available mappings per layout type and set other options when needed by the mapping
- HIGH_PRIO switch to wide (on ANSI) and split (on Ortho) whenever a layout with thumb letter is selected.

refactoring:
- remove home finger properties; use keyEffort==Home instead.

better visual design:
   - scoring and description of learning/single key/bigram classes
   - Mapping Name not be centered when it wraps to two lines.
   - Enter and Space as a lighter shade of the special-key background (will change when a letter is mapped to the key)
   - show both special-key background and finger assignment / effort score colors: 
     + either use SVG pattern to create stripes in both colors.
     + or use the finger/score color in combination with a thick border around the key. (As we do with the home row in the fingers viz.)
   - Change description fields of layout and mapping data to JSX.Component (or markdown)

optional features:
- mouse hover in bigram viz to only show lines in/out of one key. 
  + Create a specific detail view to show the frequency of 
- 'frame layout' options for nav/del keys
- Alternatively, offer an option to hide all keys outside the core 30 mapping (labeled "show only letters and prose punctuation").
  (Especially split ortho keyboards have too many permutations that people are using.)
- add "specialized" column to mapping list and mention the meaning in the mapping description in the Details Area.
  + when a mapping has both core and full mappings defined for a layout, show both in the list!
- hex-shaped keys
- let AI generate a few more unit tests
- only deduct half the learning points for changed punctuation keys. (Relevant only for `;`, since `-` is out of the box and others aren't moved.)


research option:
- can we redefine thumb30 in a way that omits ;- from its character set and let's the frame map all punctuation? (Except , and . which are constant in all our variants.)
- can we make a data model for the Harmonic that allows us to simply scale the layout for a width of 14, 13, and 12 keys?
   * 12 only works as "balanced" (full-width home row, lower shift), 14 as "traditional" and "balanced", 13 as balanced and "mid-shift".
   * for the layout itself it should be easy, but defining really sensible punctuation depends on the exact number and position of keys available!
   * some options for the bottom row should be available, although H12 only supports 1U space, for H13 I prefer the current alignment, only H14 can choose between having more 1u keys or some 1.5u keys.
- variants of Harmonic bottom row, including a 2u central space bar ()

Postponed:
- nav keys and AltGr layer – this fits better into an app/page focused on the Harmonic keyboard. There's already enough info on layers on the 'net, so let's keep this app focused on the themes of casual mappings, thumb-E, and the alt-fingering aspect of staggering.  

discarded ideas:
- have thumb30 mapping include placeholders for punctuation characters, so that the frame layout can set them!
  -> won't help, because a consistent arrangement of punctuation depends on where those are actually mapped
  (Both parenthesis and nav keys are pairs, and also +- ideally are a pair, and maybe even /\.)



building usable things:
 - actual Windows implementation of ANSI-Thumby, including a few useful options of using CapsLock sensibly and what key to swap with AltGr so that it can be mapped to E. (Maybe some ISO key not used on ANSI board or the other way round.)

possible additions:
http://www.michaelcapewell.com/projects/keyboard/#The_QWERF_Layout
strangely changes mostly the right hand.

https://mk.bcgsc.ca/carpalx/?partial_optimization – makes only 5 or 10 swaps, but doesn't respect hand or finger position. 10 swaps without those restrictions is already a completely unrecognizable new layout.

https://mk.bcgsc.ca/carpalx/?keyboard_layouts this page shows c-qwerty and variants, that swap ED UJ IK OL and some other pairs. I might include one of them in my app.

But with thumb-E everything changes! The layout with the least changes is simply the thumb-E-B-hyphen swap. (Of course even simpler without B, but with B is what I have been using for 11 years now.) When adding D and R in the swap, T and F are just begging to join as well. Adding G is a matter of taste. But then the ring is definitely closed.
Ironically, on the right hand, all swaps are independent NJ, IK, OL, H;, with the exception of UK (if used) and YJ; (needed in Harmonic).

Commit message:

permissibly show mappings in the list and automatically switch layout type and options when the mapping is selected.

backlog.md, after:


done:
- switch between keyboard layouts DONE
- highlight active keyboard layout DONE
- implement ANSI layout  DONE
- remove duplicated code between Ansi and Harmonic DONE
- add narrow/wide option for ANSI
    - add second layout config DONE
    - refactor app to hold layout options closer to Keyboard layout component (maybe container components LayoutArea and MappingArea?)
    - mapping list, learning effort, colors 
- implement Ortho split layout; simply stagger bottom row to get thumb keys.
- list key mappings
- switch between mappings
- show mapping information: sourceUrl and diff to Qwerty
- calculated bigram effort
- change all the legends to display (weighted) counts (or percentage of strokes) in the colored boxes
  and show the scores as part of the legend text. (As is already done with the Learning Diff...).
- single key frequency viz
- angle viz
- URL #fragments for state parameters: layoutType, split, HarmonicType, vizType, ...
- add Unicode mappings for bottom row modifiers, so that FlexMappings can change them. Minimum affected keys are AltGr and what's to the right of it.
- add "FlexMapping.comparisonBase" so that Qwertz and Colemak can be chosen by layouts based on those.
- inner index column should not count as bigram conflict, because of nice alt-fingering.
- highlight all mappings that have the best typing scores among all layouts with the same learning effort or less
  (This is the same as the layouts with the lowest learning effort given their typing scores.)
    + One highlight color for layouts with thumb letter and another color for ones without.
    + Candidates are: Flip/Twist, Quipper, Colemak and Cozy Keyboard, Thumby Quipper, Thumby Colemak.
    + Yes, three of each seems like a good offering.
      We could add Qwerty with just the Thumb-E, but I think it's not a worthy choice except as a temporary experience.

- shows all mappings in the list and sets layout type and options when needed by the mapping.
    + don't show metrics in mapping list when mapping does not work with current layout type
    + set layout options for mapping and disable the checkbox if mapping only supports one setting


bugs fixed:
 - Learnability Score for Wide ANSI in Mapping List is changing when I select different mappings =:-[]
 - Frequency for Thumby bigrams should be counted, even if there is no wide layout.
- validate mapping/layout/options combination from URL data, so that the app doesn't crash
- handle Harmonic variants without a matching mapping:
  + when switching to the Harmonic layout with an unsupported mapping already set
  + when switching the Harmonic variant


missing core features:
- Outside of the app: make a graph of the "efficiency frontier" with those six layouts and Qwerty — once for single and once for bigram scores. 
  (Maybe add the minimum SFB layout from Oxley each with and without thumb letter use as the right fence post for the diagram.)

- add some more explanations, especially for:
  + the "wide" mappings
  + Harmonic and Ortho general texts (maybe (i) icon in layout bar). But still repeat that text under the H and O variants.

- check consistency of all mappings:
   + variants for different layouts should be consistent (only have differences clearly attributed to the layout)
   + maybe check if some full-mappings can be omitted, because thumb30 and 3×10 do the job well enough?
   + related thumby variants should be consistent (only have the intended differences)
     * especially Thumby-KU

- switch to wide (on ANSI) and split (on Ortho) whenever a layout with thumb letter is selected.

bugs:
- the comparisonBase mapping needs to have definitions on all layouts, thus at least a mapping30.
   Add that for qwertz and maybe add a full mapping for the ortho board to make the comparison more meaningful.
- on Thumby / Cozy Keyboard English variant, the apostrophe is counted as "changed on same finger" on the ortho layout, 
  but not on ANSI wide, although it's on the same position.
  It should not be counted as changed on either, because the change is due to the wide layout, not the letter mapping.
- fix altFinger configuration for Harmonic variants AND show it in finger viz

refactoring:
- remove home finger properties; use keyEffort==Home instead.

better visual design:
   - scoring and description of learning/single key/bigram classes
   - Mapping Name not be centered when it wraps to two lines.
   - Enter and Space as a lighter shade of the special-key background (will change when a letter is mapped to the key)
   - show both special-key background and finger assignment / effort score colors: 
     + either use SVG pattern to create stripes in both colors.
     + or use the finger/score color in combination with a thick border around the key. (As we do with the home row in the fingers viz.)
   - Change description fields of layout and mapping data to JSX.Component (or markdown)

optional features:
- mouse hover in bigram viz to only show lines in/out of one key. 
  + Create a specific detail view to show the frequency of 
- 'frame layout' options for nav/del keys
- Alternatively, offer an option to hide all keys outside the core 30 mapping (labeled "show only letters and prose punctuation").
  (Especially split ortho keyboards have too many permutations that people are using.)
- add "specialized" column to mapping list and mention the meaning in the mapping description in the Details Area.
  + when a mapping has both core and full mappings defined for a layout, show both in the list!
- hex-shaped keys
- let AI generate a few more unit tests
- only deduct half the learning points for changed punctuation keys. (Relevant only for `;`, since `-` is out of the box and others aren't moved.)


research option:
- can we redefine thumb30 in a way that omits ;- from its character set and let's the frame map all punctuation? (Except , and . which are constant in all our variants.)
- can we make a data model for the Harmonic that allows us to simply scale the layout for a width of 14, 13, and 12 keys?
   * 12 only works as "balanced" (full-width home row, lower shift), 14 as "traditional" and "balanced", 13 as balanced and "mid-shift".
   * for the layout itself it should be easy, but defining really sensible punctuation depends on the exact number and position of keys available!
   * some options for the bottom row should be available, although H12 only supports 1U space, for H13 I prefer the current alignment, only H14 can choose between having more 1u keys or some 1.5u keys.
- variants of Harmonic bottom row, including a 2u central space bar ()

Postponed:
- nav keys and AltGr layer – this fits better into an app/page focused on the Harmonic keyboard. There's already enough info on layers on the 'net, so let's keep this app focused on the themes of casual mappings, thumb-E, and the alt-fingering aspect of staggering.  

discarded ideas:
- have thumb30 mapping include placeholders for punctuation characters, so that the frame layout can set them!
  -> won't help, because a consistent arrangement of punctuation depends on where those are actually mapped
  (Both parenthesis and nav keys are pairs, and also +- ideally are a pair, and maybe even /\.)



building usable things:
 - actual Windows implementation of ANSI-Thumby, including a few useful options of using CapsLock sensibly and what key to swap with AltGr so that it can be mapped to E. (Maybe some ISO key not used on ANSI board or the other way round.)

possible additions:
http://www.michaelcapewell.com/projects/keyboard/#The_QWERF_Layout
strangely changes mostly the right hand.

https://mk.bcgsc.ca/carpalx/?partial_optimization – makes only 5 or 10 swaps, but doesn't respect hand or finger position. 10 swaps without those restrictions is already a completely unrecognizable new layout.

https://mk.bcgsc.ca/carpalx/?keyboard_layouts this page shows c-qwerty and variants, that swap ED UJ IK OL and some other pairs. I might include one of them in my app.

But with thumb-E everything changes! The layout with the least changes is simply the thumb-E-B-hyphen swap. (Of course even simpler without B, but with B is what I have been using for 11 years now.) When adding D and R in the swap, T and F are just begging to join as well. Adding G is a matter of taste. But then the ring is definitely closed.
Ironically, on the right hand, all swaps are independent NJ, IK, OL, H;, with the exception of UK (if used) and YJ; (needed in Harmonic).
